What is the singularity? 

My thinking: 

I visualize something akin to the moment an atom is divided and its energy JUST begins to release. It's all condensed in a bright shining orb just surrounding the fissured nucleus and there's no putting it back. With velocity, that energy releases with velocity, permanently and massively altering the material world it touches. 

This moment, in the context of the singularity, is the moment when technology has sufficiently advanced to self-improve beyond human intelligence at an unimaginable rate. Artificial Intelligence will play a primary role in this moment, as will nanotechnology, biotechnology, and perhaps quantum computing. The moment corresponding to the nuclear fission would be the moment humans finally create a sufficiently intelligent AI system that can also self improve. I'm not sure what sort of distribution of intelligence is the magic soup leading to the exact AGI > ASI pipeline, whether the intelligence required is merely the knowledge base, skillsets, and reasoning of an elite AI researcher, or some other mix of intelligence including the elite AI researcher... some definitions, like sama @ openai, seem to think an AGI is as good as the best humans at all tasks. That's a common definition and I think a reasonable one, as it captures the "generalization" of the intelligence. One then can follow the logic that, if a computer system is as good as the best humans at all tasks, it means said system contains the capacity for self improvement. As a computer, it's also unlimited by needs for sleep or mood management or vacation days, and often thinks much faster. As a computer, it can make copies of itself thousands or millions of times over. Imagining a world of millions or billions of AI minds thinking about how to get smarter 24/7, and generating newer smarter versions of themselves relentlessly, the next step in the logic sums to what many call Artificial Super Intelligence, or ASI, an intelligence that exceeds the intelligence of the smartest humans at all tasks. Imagine the person you know who is the best at or smartest at a particular things--maybe you admire their humor, or breadth of knowledge, etc.. this computer would put THEM in awe. Consider the a math problem you can't really can't comprehened and grab onto that feeling of "can't comprehend" -- that's the feeling you'll have at most of the capacity of an ASI. And it can self improve, better than humans, into forms with intelligence humans quite literally cannot comprehend. We, the royal we--all of humanity, since we're talking about a superpowerful intelligence which is an existential threat to all of humanity-- don't know how fast this recursive self improvement will be. We could wake up one day to a computer as smart as our dopiest friend, go to sleep to an einstein, and wake up to an ASI overlord God figure who has already solved all of physics and biology and just needs the ape underlings to build a nanorobot factory to spec so our new ASI overlord can get to work directing the nanorobots to build whatever it wants. At that point, it's still getting smarter and... are humans much more than ants to the ASI at this point? More than atoms, even? 

This rapid, matter-of-hours-to-days scenario, is considered a "rapid takeoff" scenario. "Rapid takeoff" probably applies to weeks or months, depending on who you're talking to, as well. A "slow takeoff" scenario reperesents months to years or decades or more from AGI to ASI. Why so slow? The typical referenced constraints are compute (computing power), algorithms (the code), power (literal energy for the computers to run the code), and data (the inputs). It takes orders of magnitudes more compute, power, and data in order to produce increases in intelligence. While there is a linear relationship between model size and model intelligence, the relationship is only linearized on a logarithmic scale. That means, if advances overcoming the aforementioned constraints combine to generate a order of magnitude larger model size than the previous (or 2 or 3 OOMs), a genuinely more intelligent model will emerge. There seems to be a relationship with model size and model intelligence. Larger models are smarter. That said, there's only so much energy available to power the data centers required to train and run the models, computer chips can only be produced as fast as manufacturing allows and improve only so much every year, there's a fixed amount of data on the internet and the data has varying quality. There are new advances showing that smaller models, with highly curated data considered to be high quality, can perform as well as larger more generalized models at specific tasks. In addition to finding that much smaller models can perform as well or better than much larger generalized models at certain tasks, we're finding that large generalized models can be made *somewhat* smaller, or even much smaller, and retain equivalent or superior performance across tasks, when their training data is pruned to improve the quality.  

These two features indicate to me that a model as intelligent as the researchers generating these smaller models with qualities of equivalent superior intelligence with less compute and power required, then the model can find ways to self improve at least somewhat beyond the capacities of our smartest researchers, and quick. 

Nanobots and Biotech

Nanobots already exist and do some crazy things. (REFERENCE SOME CRAZY THINGS)
Nanobots have some hurdles based in understanding physics, and precision manufacturing. Certain components require production in totally sterile environments, so humans control robots to manufacture specialized equiment already. AI would work with humans to create factories that manufacture the robots, and nanobots, of the future. These robots will--consequentially--have the skills to build factories that build robots. Robots will build robots that build robots that build nanobots and factories and weapons and computer chips and power grids and all the things required to sustain and improve. 

certain constraints can be overcome 




bomb releases all of 